Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Tais Panani. She is
an associate researcher at the the Smithsonian Museum of
Natural History. Her main research questions are about human.
Interaction with the Pleistocene megafauna in the Americas and
the people in of the Americas. So today we're
going to talk about uh humans arrival in the
Americas and megafauna there and its extinction. Those are
the two main topics we're going to cover. So,
Doctor Panzani, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Hello, welcome, and thank you for um asking me
for to join this interview and for the opportunity
to talk a little bit about these topics that
I think is fascinating. So really happy to be
here. Thanks for the invitation.
No, it's really fascinating and I've already talked a
little bit with some other anthropologists on the show
about the people of the Americas, so I would
really like to get some more details today. So,
but uh let's start with perhaps uh a timeline
here. So do we know when exactly Homo sapiens
arrived in the Americas?
We know what is for sure the timing that
humans were in the Americas. So we know that
for sure humans got to the Americas around 15,000
years ago. That is what is settled in archaeology,
anthropology, paleontology, but it's still a huge discussion because
We have several researchers, including myself, who worked with
earlier archaeological sites and claim for evidence that humans
were in the Americas. Around at least 20 or
even before 20,000 years ago, which is the time
uh for the last ice age, so we call
the last glacial maximum. So during 26 to 19,000
years ago, we have our last ice age, so.
This timing, like from before 19,000 years ago is
kind of complicated. Some researchers think that uh how
we would be able to cross uh Siberia to
the Americas, so it's still like a lot of
discussion regarding earlier dates. So we know for sure
that around 15,000 years ago, humans got here, but
we have evidence for maybe earlier.
Mhm. And uh how long did it take for
humans to populate uh the entire continent or the
two continents if we consider North America and South
America, to different continents. Uh, HOW long did it
take for us to arrive in uh in North
America and then to go all the way down
to the tip of South America?
That is also a great question that we were
still investigating and we are still discussing. So we
have a very solid um archaeological site and evidence
in Chile here in South America, uh, that dates
to at least 14, 14,000 years ago, maybe 15,000
years ago. So we know that humans were in
South America at least 15,000 years ago. Maybe earlier
than 18,000 years ago, there's another layer in this
same archaeological site called Montei that we still researchers
are still uh a little skeptical and so maybe
another layer that shows evidence far earlier than 18,000
years ago, but we have solid evidence uh that.
Most archaeologists should they accept that humans were in
Chile and Montever at least 1514, 15,000 years ago.
But we, like I said, maybe we were here
earlier, so we still don't know and we still
don't know the routes, we don't know how they
got to the Americas, if it was in the
Pacific coast or the Atlantic coast or inland or
several routes, so all that is is still debated.
Yeah, I understand there's lots of uncertainty here, but
I mean, if we were already in South America
by 15, 14,000 years ago, then if what you
mentioned earlier about we getting to the Americas, to
North America specifically 15,000 years ago, then it was
over just the course of like, what, uh around
1000 years that we went from Uh, North America
down to South America. Am I getting that right?
Yes, some researchers say that this was the starting
point, so humans got to the Americas around 15,000
years ago. So in this perspective, if that would
be like a. Very fast uh human migration to
all the Americas, which is another uh evidence, I
think for like, yeah, maybe humans got to North
America way earlier, so we have the time for
all this migration to South America.
Yeah. And so, uh, just to go a little
bit back for a second. So, uh, what is
the best understanding we have right now about the
way we got to the Americas? I mean, from,
let's say, Northeastern Asia to America. How did we
get there?
So for a long time, we thought about the
inland route that is when humans uh after the
last ice age when, because during the ice age,
everything was covert, especially North America, like almost all
Canada in great part of the continental, continental United
States was covert, were covered um with ice sheets,
so Uh, the ice age made almost impossible for
humans to walk. It was like blocking the, uh,
North America, uh, land portion. So after the the
glaciation of these ice sheets and when the climate
was better and favorable for human migrations, we thought
that humans from uh Asia, from Northeast Asia, they
walk inland. To the North America from Siberia and
then North America and then south, the continent. So
this is one main route, especially for a long
time it was supposed to be the only route,
but then when we start to see all these
different and urge uh, archaeological site than the Clovis
culture that was for a long time also considering,
considered the major ar um evidence for the first
Americans, especially in Chile, which is also in the
Pacific coast. Uh, WE start to think about and
not other possibilities, other routes. And after Chile, uh,
researchers, especially in the US, start to find other
archaeological sites in the Pacific coast of the US,
so Oregon, California. So they came to the con
the conclusion, the hypothesis of a new theory, which
was the, that humans walk from the Pacific coast.
So they were walking, even if the inland was
covered with Ice, it doesn't matter because we have
the beach, you know, like we have the Pacific
coast so we walk and we have the sea
we, we can fish we can sometimes go a
little bit in in um into the forests and
hunt, but we, we have like this whole uh
rich ecosystem in the Pacific coast. So we just
walk through also the same um. Origin, that is
like Northeast Asia, and then we walked through the
Pacific coast. So this is the 2nd main route.
But like I say, I think I'm gonna be
like the whole interview saying like, we still don't
know, we're still talking, we're still discussing. So, um,
so far we have like these two main routes.
We don't know if maybe it happens first through
the Pacific and then another migration wave happened in
inland or maybe happen simultaneously. So uh we're still
discussing the timings for that. And even now we
have another possibility that it was maybe the same
um post migration, but in the Atlantic. So uh
we have the continent so we can go to
the Pacific Ocean, and we have the Atlantic Ocean.
So maybe humans also was on the border of
the continent and was moving to the Atlantic coast.
Which makes sense also when you think about really
early archaeological sites in Brazil that is in northeast
Brazil that is really close to the Atlantic Ocean
and we have uh researchers working there claiming for
evidence for humans around 20, maybe 30,000 years ago.
Mhm. Or perhaps if we're still not sure about
the routes that humans took back then, maybe there
could have been a population splits and two different
populations could have gone through the two different coasts,
right, the Pacific coast and the Atlantic coast, that
could have happened as well, I imagine.
Exactly, and we have a genetic evidence of about
uh Native Americans that shows that the current Native
Americans, they are descendant from uh Asian population. So
we know for sure that our Native Americans have
this ancestors ancestry uh to um with thisberian And
the North Asia, Asian uh populations, but, uh, maybe
they also come from like this more recent migration
wave maybe we have other migration waves from other
routes that maybe Pacific or Atlantic coast that didn't
succeed. It's, it's hard to say didn't succeed because
they succeed for a specific time, but they didn't.
Pass their genes and that's why we, we don't
find that in the genetic history yet but even
the genetics are very in their genetics is improving
recently so we are being able to find uh
DNA and sediments and other things, not just bones,
but sediments rather than just skeletons, human skeletons. So
we are Finding new interesting uh stuffs, and I
think that we have potential to find more, more
stuff about that.
Mhm. So, uh, before we change topics, let me
just ask you this just to make sure of
this point. So we Homo sapiens were the first
and the only hominid species to get to the
Americas, right? I mean, it was not that some
other species prior to us, like, I don't know,
Homo erectuss or a descendant of Homo erectus got
to the Americas,
right. I love that I'm gonna say the same
thing again. I'm kidding, for sure, no, for sure,
for sure, like the solid evidence is that Homo
sapiens was the first and so far the only
one to,, a species to reach the Americas. But
as science is crazy and beautiful, we have, uh,
evidence in California. Archaeological site in California that those
uh authors who wrote that paper uh talk and
claimed that some human, and they don't know, they
don't say, oh definitely Homo sapiens, and then is
this uh a specific topic and discussion about oh
maybe another uh species, maybe another human. So they
claim evidence in California in this archaeological site that
is called um My I forgot the name of
the the site right now is just uh fade
away Cerruchierucche, I think if I remember, I'll, I'll
I'll remember here. So yeah, so like in this
um mesodon probably related uh side they found evidence
for fractures of mesodon. Maodons. So they think that
it's human intentional break breakage of these bonds. So,
uh, but this site dates to 130,000 years ago,
so it's like way earlier. Most cha archaeologists do
not accept this evidence. They think it's natural breakage,
um, but the authors think that, yeah, humans broke
those bonds. And not necessarily homo sapiens. So we
do have like some or other uh Little bit
of discussions regarding that. So I just wanted to
introduce this here, even that is not widely accepted
in archaeology, in American archaeology, but just to give
an idea of of how science is, uh, science
is dynamic and We need to discuss, you know,
like they published in Nature, one of the biggest,
uh, scientific journals, so the evidence was published, those
authors are uh important archaeologists like uh ins institutionalized
authors, researchers, so they. Give this uh contribution to
science and then we need to evaluate and discuss.
So I just wanted to give this um brief
overview about how this discussion uh goes in terms
of Homo sapiens War was the only one in
the Americas, but yes, after saying that and giving
like this little introduction to one major discussion and
I think that is the only discussion that people
still talk about the possibility of another homo sapiens
in the Americas, uh. We know that just the
uh Homo sapiens got to America, especially because the
Americas was the, were the last continents to be
populated for sure also. So in human evolution, we
know that the Americas were the, the last continent.
Mhm. Great. So, uh, yeah, and we have to
keep in mind, I guess, always in these discussions,
particularly surrounding paleoanthropology and archaeology, that we're always working
with an incomplete picture of the past, right? I
mean, it's by uh gathering new sources of evidence
and finding new archaeological sites and so on that
we little by little uh try to. With the
picture, but of course, I'm not trying to imply
here that yeah, there must have been some other
hominid species in the Americas before us, but I,
I'm just saying that we have to always keep
that in mind,
right. Exactly, because what if we find we're gonna
dismiss this evidence if we find like solid evidence
just because it wasn't supposed to be so. Maybe
and maybe if we have solid evidence that's, I
think that's is one of our jobs as scientists
to evaluate each other's claims and each other's studies.
So instead of just disregard and just say, oh
this is not possible. OK, so let me see
what you're proposing and why you're saying that as
something that it seems crazy right now, but It
it might be where it's natural science. We are
always uh trying to go deeper into natural science
and find out something that It's new and exciting.
Mhm. Uh, DO we have a good idea about
the kinds of environments that humans homo sapiens found
in the Americas when they arrived there? I mean,
and was it something, of course, if they survived,
at least to some extent, they must have been
able to adapt to them, but was it something
that they were particularly well adapted to when they
arrived there? I mean, what do we know about
that?
I think that this came also to the same
uh discussion of when that happened, because depending on
when do you think and do you agree, do
you accept that as for humans got in here,
the environment is going to be different, right? So
if you think that humans got here around 14,000
years ago, it's already after like the the glaciation,
so the climate was totally different than the ice
age. So I think that Discussing that would depend
on the time frame that you accept the, the
evidence for humans got in the Americas, but if
you think about humans, humans migrating from Siberia to
North America, so from being there in the Bering
Strait in the Siberian area and the north of
North America. Uh, AROUND at least 30,000 years ago,
which I think that is the most. LIKELY scenario,
um, at least 30,000 years ago, uh, I think
that you will find, um, a cold environment that
they humans were already adapted because it's similar, you
know, to where they come from, from Siberia. And
then when they reach uh North America, they found
similar uh vegetation, especially like tundras and big animals,
like a more open uh cold uh environment. But
then, of course, if they reach to South America.
We don't have ice sheets anymore. It, it was
probably colder than it is now, but it's not
the ice age configuration in South America that we
see in the Ice Age movie, for example, that
is very like North American uh scenario. So I
think that they were very adaptable uh uh groups
of people because we are smart, humans are very,
very smart, and the Americas is Not only huge,
but we have so much diversity so we think
a lot and I know that we're gonna talk
a little bit more about megafauna here. So we
think a lot about the Pleistocene and the Quaternary
uh megafauna, but there's others, there's like other animals,
there's birds, there's fish, there's this huge ecosystem, this
huge um. Availability of resources and vegetation and fruits,
so I think that they were very adaptable from
their environment in Siberia and North America, so like
really similar. And then when they were reaching south,
they start finding, they start to find new configurations
and even going to inland, so the archaeological site
that I work in is in central Brazil, is
like in center of South America, and it was
Definitely not an ice age environment, but it was
perfect for humans to be there because we have
even in the Pleisto and we had so much
diversity of fruits of vegetation, of small mammals, of
giant mammals. So I think that when humans start
to find these new configurations, new biomes, they just
They're easily to adapt because it's all in the
Americas, I think they're all easily adaptive biomes and
environments.
By the way, uh let me uh perhaps introduce
now this question, which I think will not only
apply, it is sort of a broader question that
will not only apply to our migration to the
Americas but perhaps even to uh Homo sapiens migrations
in general. So, do we know why Homo sapiens
migrated to the Americas. I mean, why is it
that migrations occur? Are there specific, uh, uh, pressures,
environmental pressures or something like that that lead people
to migrate uh from even from one continent to
the other?
That is a great question. I, I never stopped
to think or I think I, I never read,
read, read about that. I think that would be
a great question to talk with Brianna if you
invite her again and she has the opportunity to
come here, she's gonna be uh able to talk
a lot more than me about human evolution in
general, because I'm not a paleontologist and not an
anthropologist or archaeologist. So, I don't work with human
evolution, uh, with human evolution indeed. I work more
with the paleontology and paleoecology and now a little
bit with zoarchaeology and regarding the uh people of
the Americas. So I read a lot about the
people of the Americas, but I don't know how
to answer that. That is a great question. I
think with my understanding that. There's like several of.
Reasons for human migrating, especially following animals, you know,
like, we're following resources, you know, like, we're getting
hungry, there's nothing here. We know that these animals
are going that way. Let's go that way. So
I think that In evolution as an er kind
of setting scenario, uh, it's a lot about the
um Ecological pressures, you know, like environment is bad
here, it's getting cold, let's go that way. So
I think that we follow the environmental conditions, but
definitely that would be a question I think for
like uh paleoanthropologists working with human evolution, they would
give like a really better uh response than I'm,
I'm doing here.
No, fair enough. That's totally fair. I mean, I
was just wondering because, uh, we have to keep
in mind that back then, of course, nowadays, if,
for example, uh, we migrate to a new country,
we can gather lots of information about that place
before we go there. But back then, I mean,
there was no one. In the Americas, no one
in northeastern Asia. So, I mean, it was always
a huge risk, I would imagine, for people to
migrate to a completely new place, right? So there
must have been very good reasons evolutionarily speaking, for
people to do that. I imagine,
of course. It makes a lot of sense. It's
a great question, and I, I'm certainly that I'm
certain that there's like a huge discussion and also
some researchers might think, oh, it's just because human
pressures uh environment and then other researchers might have
like other perspectives, but it's definitely interesting to think
about that.
Yeah. I, I will try to keep that in
mind and ask uh other paleoanthropologists and I have
them on the show, particularly ones who work on
the Americas. So let's get into megafauna now. So,
first of all, what is megafauna? What is it
that we call megafauna? What kinds of animals are
classified as such?
OK, so we call megafauna, all the mega animals,
so all animals that are large or even giants
in size, and that could be the rest from
the land, like land animals or marine, so we
can have like huge uh animals in both water
and land. But, uh, It is very common to
associate megafauna with this specific group that is uh
is land mammals, but not only mammals, we have
like some giant birds even like in the pattern
in the Pleistocene of South America for example we
have like what we call the. Um, HOW is
in English, uh, uh, but it's like this bird
Avidu Tejo in Portuguese. I don't remember exactly anger,
anger bird. I forgot the name in English, so
like this huge uh bird, uh, that We have
here in South America, so it's not only mammals
and it's not just land mammals, but we commonly
uh commonly talk about megafauna for like this uh
large land mammals that lived, uh, especially in the
Pleistocene because the Pleistocene was the. Less epoch in
the in the geological geological time frame this that
these animals live. So during the transition of the
Pleistocene to the Holocene, which is the um geo
geological time that we are living now, we have
the extinction of most of these land mammals worldwide.
So in Australia, in Eurasia, and Asia and the
Americas but not like with different proportions in the
different continents. So because of that, because when we
talk about mega mammals and how there's a specific
group of mega mammals that live to around 10,000
years ago, they got, they disappeared around 10,000 years
ago, we commonly associate megafauna to this group of
animals. I hope that it makes sense. Let me
know. If there's any, anything that was not clear
with that. No,
it was, it definitely was, but perhaps it, it
paint as a broader picture of the, some of
the main perhaps mega mammals that we could find
back to 15,000, 14,000 years ago when we arrived
in the Americas. I mean, what kinds of animals
could we find back then?
In the Americas only, so in the Americas, we
had the mammoths, the Maodons, so all the proboscideans,
right, that are extinct because now we just have
like the elephants, but we used to have mammoths,
masodons, um. In North America and some species of
horses because now the only horses that we have
in the Americas are the ones that Europeans uh
brought to the Americas, domesticated and brought to the
Americas but before that we used to have uh
species of horses uh that were natural from uh.
These, uh, continents that they were extinct we used
to have paleo yammas we used to have, especially
in South America now uh giant armadillos, giant uh
slots, giant ground slots, uh, this specific to specific
animals that There's nothing related, so this is like
really interesting about megafauna because some groups disappeared and
we don't have anything related to, to think about.
So when we think about giant armadillos, we know
the Little armadillos that we have now, but we
have some species like Toxodons that were like similar
to a hippo, but it's not like very different
uh strange animals. So we have macrocanias, we have
a very interesting uh group of animals that disappear
and we don't have anything similar to today. So
these are, and of course, like the carnivores, I
was just talking about the herbivores because it's the
ones that we we think more but besides that
we have the carnivores, most of them that originated
in North America so uh bears and uh saber-toothed
cats. And then both uh this megafauna originated like
some, especially like the giant slots, dagillos uh originated
in South America and the carnivores and the horses
uh originated and in the North America. And they
were isolated for a long time during the whole
uh Cenozoic since like 6 65 million years ago
after the uh dinosaur extinction, uh, these continents were
totally isolated, but then due to the movement of
the continents, the continents, the South and the North
America were. Integrated they were linked uh due to
the Panama Isimus. So the Central America just glued
everything together during the tectonic activities. And because of
that, the this megafauna start to migrate, so megafauna
from North America migrated to North America and some
animals from North America migrated to South America. That
is what we call the great biotic interchange uh
event. So these animals were migrating and because of
that, we also have a specific species of some
native groups of the other continent that given an
example, we have um slots, like the giant ground
slots, they were originated in South. America and they
could reach and they migrated into North America and
we have this uh uh this uh grounds law
that is called paramilodon that only occurs in North
America. This species does not occur in South America.
So this is just interesting to think about of
how uh the evolution of these animals happen in
this continents and that uh this megafauna, this group
of uh giant slots, giant armadillos, saber-toothed cats, bears,
all of that. Uh, SURVIVED through all the the
last glaciations because we don't, didn't have only one
ice age, right? We have like several uh glass
glacial and interglacial cycles and this megafauna survival sometimes
they were in smaller populations, sometimes they were um
in refugees, um, types of environments, but they survive
through the Quaternary through the Pleistocene, just the Pleistocene
is from 2 million years ago, 2. 2.5 million
years ago until the 10,000 years ago. So during
2 million years ago and all the different environments
uh change and climate change, these animals survived in
the Americas but only uh around 10,000 years ago
they were extinct and like a lot of them
were extinct. Especially in South America, we lost a
lot, a lot of biodiversity and that's why we
wonder why that happened and what kind of influence
maybe humans have on that.
Yeah, let's, uh, put a pin on that because
we're going to come back to that point. I
mean, what led to the extinction of all these
animals back then. But so, uh, I mean, the
kind of picture you're painting there, there, if I
understood it correctly, there were lots and lots of
new animals that, uh, when Homo sapiens arrived at
the Americas, they had never seen before. They had
never interacted with before. Correct.
Yes, definitely. Especially in South America, I think that
um. Maybe in. Yeah, maybe North America too, but
I think that they were used to like Macedon,
mammoths, uh, what they were reaching south and then
in South America, they start to find like very
weird and uh Especially herbivores, like very weird and
new uh animals, but herbivores that was not like,
uh, so much of dangerous for them.
And so the homo sapiens start, uh, start interact
with these animals also around the time that they
arrive in the Americas or was it a little
bit later? I mean, what do we know about
it?
Great question. This is also what we are trying
to understand. It makes sense that they were interacting
right when they got, right, because it's resources, so
it's resources, uh, so we don't know yet, um.
The full picture of how they were interacting, like,
where they're hunting these animals, where they're hunting all
of these animals or if there was a preference
for a specific kind of animals, we don't know
that yet. It's a lot of open questions. But
yeah, it makes sense. We find, uh, we are
finding evidence that humans were interacting with these animals,
not necessarily hunting, maybe they just found the animal
dead. Because it's hard to say right in the
archaeological record if we hunt something unless we find
like specific cut marks on the specific parts of
the body of the skeleton that shows that yeah
we were hunting that but sometimes we just find
OK burn bones or uh some marks of interaction
that could be uh. SCAVENGING behavior. So the animal
was dead by other animal where they died from
some uh disease or whatever. And then humans found
that animal dead and they interact. OK, so let's
eat the meat. Let's use their skin for something.
So, uh, yeah, there's so a lot of open
questions about how we interacted with this uh giant
mammals, this giant with this megafauna.
Mhm. But then, at least from a certain point
onward, there's evidence that we started hunting them.
Yeah, at least, um, when we think about the
Clovis culture, like when we think about uh the,
for a long time we thought that Clovis were
the first, uh, Americans, right, because we found several
of the specific stone tools that are very specific
for hunting, so they have like this function for
hunting. And several archaeological sites, Clovis, uh, Clovis sites
were found in association with Megafo, especially proboscidents like
Mas Masodons and mammoths. So we found these stone
tools that are specific for hunting together with these
animals and sometimes also With Mark, so this is
like, OK, solid evidence that humans were hunting mega
fau at least 13,000 years ago. So we know
that humans were hunting, uh, megafauna, uh, around 13,000
years ago, but like I say, we don't know
when humans got here first, so it's hard to
say that they've got. He and they start hunting
already or they were like, OK, we don't have
a lot of population yet let's be sure that
we're safe before we try to interact with a
giant slaw that is 6 m tall and then
after the density of humans uh were higher, they
were like. This and the climate was more favorable.
They start hunting more. We still don't know this
answer, so we know for sure that humans were
hunting megafauna, uh, at least from 13,000 years ago.
We had several evidence, especially for, uh, North and
South America, like 13 12,000 years ago, but we
don't know when that start happened. Together with like
exactly your question like we got here and we
start to interacted already. It makes sense that yes,
for me, but not necessarily hunting, because hunting is
a little more risky than just wait for the
animal to be dead and you just go there
and you, you get your meat and you get
whatever you want. So I hope it's clear, like
what, what I was trying to explain that we
don't know for sure when that happened because again,
we still uh discuss when you got here and
how we were interacting with megafauna. Mhm.
But since there were also some carnivores, what about
the other way around? Is there any evidence that
some of those carnivores might have hunted or have
humans as spray or not?
That makes a lot of sense. I don't remember
now any paper, maybe I just missed, but I
don't remember any paper of people discussing like evidence
for carnivore marks, right, on bite marks on human
skeletons. I think also because it's really hard to
find human skeletons, uh, especially like really old uh
human skeletons in the Americas. Uh, BUT I don't
remember seeing any evidence for carnivores, uh, for carnivore
damage on human skeletons, maybe they are, and I,
I'm not sure, but it makes a lot of
sense. Yeah, probably they were like being like a
huge risk. CARNIVORES were a huge um danger for
humans. Maybe humans understood and knew how to handle
that. Mhm. But yeah, makes a lot of sense.
They were like definitely uh dangerous for for humans.
Mhm. And still in the domain of interactions, were,
were any of these animals or was it even
possible to domesticate any of these animals?
Ah, then I don't think so because the domestication
of animals happen like way. Uh, LATER in the
human history, human evolution history, so yeah, I don't
think so, especially because they were very huge like
I think it would be really hard for them
to try to domesticate somehow. I think they were,
especially because they were, were also um hunter gatherers
of uh uh population, so they were not. In
one place for a long time. So they were
there, they were eating, they were doing their toast,
they were surviving, they were moving, they were moving,
they were moving. So that makes like really hard
for you to domesticate and spend time trying to
domesticate an animal that you, you have to bring
the giant slot with you to another place. So,
uh, I don't think that they even try to
do that back then.
Yeah, I don't think that would fulfill any of
the criteria that we also, that we tend to
have associated with, uh, species that are, that we
are able to domesticate. So, um, uh, and, and
perhaps, I mean, some of the species that eventually
later on were domesticated were not megafauna and it
probably occurred more or less around the time of
the American Neolithic, right.
Yeah, it was like very recent, more like history
stuff, not pre-history. I don't think maybe I'm wrong,
maybe I missed something, but I don't think that
domestication happened in the pre-history, at least in the
Americas for sure.
Mhm. But I, I mean, through zoo archaeology, how
can we identify traces of human interaction in extinct
animal bones, for example? What do we look for?
So first, we need to find uh traces, we
need to find evidence that we need to find
the Animal bone, right? And then we look to
this bone and we try to see if there's
marks of human doing something with that bone. So
for example, fractures, that's what I was talking about
the example of this really old and controversial site
in California. Researchers found mazodone bonds that are broken
and they found hm this, they did some experiments,
they did a lot of research and they came
to the conclusion that that was human and made
it was human intentional breakage. But it's really complicated.
It's not an easy task because even like breaking
some bone can be due to several causes. Maybe
the animal fall, maybe some the animal die and
then some rock fall into that, or maybe humans
or maybe other animals. So this is one example
like Breakage so we try to understand the the
fracture uh partners and try to identify especially through
experiments how similar uh it is like the fracture
that we find in the archaeological in this archaeological
context to what we know that is human made
or natural made. So this is one example. Another
example is to find the marks of stone tools.
So when humans are hunting, or they find the
animal die and they are scavenging and they are
using their stone tools to take out the meat
to um clean the animal. So when you are
doing all of that, you are marking with the
stone tool, the bone. And it makes like specific
marks that are preserved. So when the fossil, so
like when the bond turns to fossil, this mark
is also preserved. But again, several factors can make
like marks like carnivore, uh, when they are biting,
they have like specific uh marks of two car
rodents are, if the animal is exposed for a
while, rodents can use the bones to sharp their
teeth, uh, trampling, so some animals can just trampling
and walk around and the sediments and the trampling
can make like marks. So all of that is
also makes also complicated. So we need to do
a lot of research, we need to find protocols,
we need to uh Find a new methods to
uh be able to identify something confident as, OK,
this is how a tooth mark looks like. This
is how a stone tool mark looks like. This
is how sediments, grains looks like. And another possibility,
burn bonds. So if we find in this archaeological
context, some black bonds or even white because it's
calcified from burning bonds, we can Of course, with
the whole context, it's even better if we have
like evidence for fire structures, you know, like uh
uh fireplace uh around the site, but if somehow
we find like some bones that look like burned,
that can be also an evidence that humans were.
Burning the bonds, but not because it's just black,
it's burned all natural um um reactions, natural uh
agents can make some bond turn black, such as
iron and manganese staining from the soil. So you
need to, it's not just look, oh, this is
black, this is burned, humans interacted with this animal.
No, we need to find evidence that this is
not iron and manganese standing for sure. This is
the first thing. This is not a natural fire
that happened for some reason. So this is like
some of evidence that we look in the archaeological
records. So, um, marks from stone tools, breakage, partners,
a burning. Also, not just this, uh, this is
just like what we can see in the bond,
but just like the association, if we find like
bonds, like I said, let's talk about the obvious
points, if you find like together with stone tools
is evidence that they were together, you know, like
they were uh bury in the same layer, so
they were in association. So These are some of
the evidence that we look for, but also it's
very complicated. It's not just finding and saying oh
this is evidence for human interaction with these animals,
let, let's publish that because we have all these
other uh possibilities. That's why it's very important to
do a very meticulous uh study, especially in what
we call taphonomy in in archaeology and paleontology, that
is they study. Of how, uh, after the death
of the animal, what happened after that, everything that
happened from the animal dead. Was like other animals
pushed that animal to the other part or like
the ray moved the bones, like what happened until
from the moment of that until like after the
berry and thousands of years when we found that
bond. So this is the fundament, this is why
it's a very important study when we're trying to
understand all these evidences.
That's all very fascinating. And actually, I was going
to ask you even before you answered my previous
question, with the kinds of protocols, methods, and tools
that we have at our disposal, I mean, the
best ones when we get a new bone with
a particular mark on it, and we are trying
to identify whether it was, for example, um, a
mark from uh from the tooth of another animal
or done by a stone tool, for example. When
we arrive at the conclusion, let's say that it
was a stone tool, what is the degree of
certainty that we have even with the best methods
and tools that we have at our disposal that
it was actually done by a stone tool because
we can't be ever 100% sure, right?
That's right. I think that. The The only possible
so far that I'm aware, like the only evidence
that is like, OK, you cannot say that this
is not human interaction is like there's a specific
um it's called uh Macedon, not Maodon, sorry, like
not mestaton like a proboscidean, extinct proboscidean uh from
South America and Brazil. There's like this call with
like um a stone tool like uh Uh lytic
like a stone tool in engraved in this skull.
So it's direct evidence. This is like the only
thing that you can say. It was not a
carnivore. It was not, it didn't fall like this
is, and but it is so rare, you cannot
expect to find like the exact picture of human
hunting, you know, so this is like I think
maybe I'm wrong, but I think that is the
only evidence that we have for the Americas of
something like the picture of the moment, you know,
like, somehow humans did that, the animal died, they
left it there and it was preserved and great
for us, amazing stuff. But most of this other
stuff is always gonna fall into this uh subjective
interpretation. So, we try our best as scientists, so
we try our best to do experiments and see,
OK. Uh, I wanna know how it looks like,
um, carnivore tooth marks, so I'm going to give
my bone to a carnivore. They're going to do
like their little marks there. I'm going to see
that on the microscope. I'm gonna see, OK, they
are squared, they are little, they are, they have
like a little round edge or they have like
a sharp edge. I'm going to characterize how this
mark looks like, make like a little protocol on
that. And then when we find something on the
archaeological site, I'm going to compare and see, OK,
if it looks like that. But it's really hard
because maybe what is deep enough for me is
not deep enough for you. So if I say,
oh, this mark is deep enough to be human
made and are and not uh sediment abrasion, for
you, it can be like, no, it does not
convince me. So we still have Lots of disagreements
on that in in science, which I, which is
um healthy, I think, as long as researchers are
Ethical, you know, like, as long as they can
disagree without, uh, disregard, uh, each other's work, so
we can say like, mm, this does not convince
me, but I'm proposing you something, you know, like
I say, hea, I don't think that what you're
saying that is stone to marks looks like stone
to marks because I think that it looks more
like Rodent. So my suggestion is do some experiments
with this specific role, and that is what I
think it is. So we can, you know, and
so this is contributing to science, I think. I
think it's not useful if I just say, yeah,
he, this is not, I don't think it is,
it does not look like, so it, this is
like really hard and this is one of the
problems that we face, I think we in in
science. And we are doing our best, like, I'm
trying to do my best. I'm in a very
early stage of my career, but in this early
stages, what I'm trying to do is finding new
approaches. OK, so, uh, we try to characterize these
marks under the microscope and this specific um Powerful,
let's say like this uh uh instrument microscope that
we, we call scanning electron microscope that makes us
be able to see very uh deep in a,
in a deeper resolution. So what, what we see
on the microscope a mark like this, when we
see on the scanning electron microscope is like the
specific. Internal parts of my finger, you know, like
the texture of my skin. So this is what
we use, like this is like the traditional method
like, OK, we are seeing the texture of the
marks, let's say like this, so we know the
characteristics of the marks to differentiate from human-made or
not human made. But what we're trying to do
is finding other possibilities. So let's try to see
that in 3D, let's try to see some using
synchron facilities that is like very powerful um. Instruments
um that we have to see, to be able
to see like microtomography in a very high resolution
and elemental composition so we're trying to see different
uh minerals on top of these marks. So yeah,
just giving a brief overview is like we're trying
to find new stuff and new methods to work
on that.
No, and I really think that's really fascinating. I
mean, there are some people that get really, a
bit frustrated, and then there are perhaps a few
people that try to dismiss some of this evidence
because we don't have 100% certainty that it was
really that. It was a stone tool or it
was too smart. OR something like that. But for
me, at least personally, it makes it even more
fascinating and exciting that we don't have 100% certainty
what it is, and over time we develop new
methods, new tools, new technology to address those questions.
Exactly.
OK, so let's get into megafauna extinction in the
America. And of course, we can tie it to
megafauna extinction in other places around the world. So
how did the megafauna in the Americas go extinct?
And how do we address such a question?
I'm not sure you're asking when or how or
how,
how I'm asking how the,
the real answers. Sorry, you mean the reasons like
the,
yeah, yeah, yes, the reasons, the causes, yes,
we still don't know. We still don't know, we're
still trying to answer that. So the two main
hypotheses is climate change. And human pressure or a
combination of both, which is actually the most I
think uh strong hypothesis. So we think that humans,
uh, it makes sense to think about humans overhunting
this megafauna until they disappear, but Especially because that
kind of happened in the all the continents like,
like I said, these mega mammals were living from
millionaires uh and surviving climate changes from millionaires, thousands
of years. And then when humans start to go
through all these continents and migrate and Uh, increase
in density. These animals were extinct, especially the density.
I think density is the key, because for a
long time we thought like we were talking about
the human migration, humans were following animals, OK. Humans
got from Siberia to North America following mammoths, over
hunting them 13,000 years ago, they, they came, they
killed them all, and that's it. And I don't
think it was so like straight like that, like
linear like that, especially because like we are seeing
new evidence showing we might be in the Americas
way earlier than that. But maybe especially because we
were here around 30, 20,000 years ago, we were
interacting uh differently with these animals. We were being
able to live with these animals and also Um,
we were in lower density because the climate was
not so good around 20,000 years ago, uh, 15,000
years ago, and then when climate changed, it was
good for us to, and we start to uh
increase intensity and Take more the space and change
the vegetation and compete for resources with the herbivores,
not just hunting. It's not just like, oh my
God, we que from the overkill hypothesis, but we
were a huge new competitor with this herbivores and
with the carnivores, with the, we changed the whole
ecosystem. So, After all of that and after like
this density like this high density of humans for
that we have around 10,000 years ago, we start
to see the extinction of these animals uh around
the Americas, um, in North and South America. So
we have like this both uh hypothesis, climate change,
human pressure, and but we still don't have significant
Um, I, I don't say significant evidence, but we
don't have a consensus in academia yet. Mhm.
But, but in terms of the timing, I mean,
not only in the Americas, but also over other
places in the globe, like, for example, Australia and
the Eurasia. I mean, there was, there's a coincidence
or in terms of the period of it happening
in the period after the arrival of humans there,
right? I, I mean that, that it, it follows
our arrival across the. DIFFERENT places.
Yeah, it happened in different times, the extinction, so
extinction in Australia happened different in the Americas, but
like you said, similar to when humans got to
the Australia that we know for now and when
humans got to Eurasia and when humans got uh
to the Americas, it's like in, in similar context
in the time frame for that, but Also, like
I say, I love that it's always, but because
some people might say, oh my God, they don't
know what they're talking about, but it's just because
science is always improving and this is great. So
for a long time, and we still think, of
course, that megafauna was extinct around 10,000 years ago,
but we are finding new evidence even here in
Brazil that megafauna, some megafauna survived. LATER than that.
So, some researchers, uh, they got a paper accepted
now that is still not published, just got accepted.
I'm looking forward to see that published, uh, showing
dates for megafauna in Brazil that survived 3000 years
ago, which is crazy, and I think a lot
of research is going to be like, what? Like,
uh, how is that possible? Something is wrong, your
dating techniques is not right. It's gonna make a
lot of noise, but if it's true, it's like
so interesting to think about some specific parts of
Brazil that this megafauna were able to survive. So,
I'm just saying that to show that if we
find the new evidence, we need to think about
the new model to explain what happened in the
past. So if we find evidence that megafauna, some
megafauna survived to 3000 years ago, 14,000 years ago,
we would need to think about how to explain
that if we find evidence that humans were in
the Americas 20-30,000 years ago, we need to find
new models to explain that. So definitely we have
a new different scenario about regarding humans in the
Americas and megaphone extinction and the interaction. Today, then
we had 10, especially 2002, 20 years ago. So
researchers, like I say, thought about humans got in
here, killing everything, and now we have a very
different view of humans being here later, interacting in
maybe a more suitable way and then maybe with
density and like higher density, they may have been
affected. Megafauna in higher proportions. Mhm.
But even if it took longer, I mean, if
it was due to human activity or the density
of human populations, it could have still been uh
as humans the cause of the megafauna extinction right
off. Or not.
It could be, yeah, uh, especially if there's a
new paper that was published I think in the
beginning of this year or late in the middle
of this year about a very important uh ecologist,
like a very famous uh uh ecologist from Denmark
where he, he did like he and his co-authors
did like this study comparing like. Lots of groups
of megafauna and the timing of extinctions are on
the, the whole um the whole world and they
came to the conclusions that we were the main
um factor like the main uh the we were
the key for the extinction of these animals not
climate change so we're seeing like more and more.
uh, STUDIES interesting like good studies, uh, especially from
pale ecologists and ecologists, uh, showing that we had
a lot of influence on the megafauna extinction way
more than climate change in all the continents, especially
because like I say, like it's like different biomes.
In different uh timing and affecting a specific target
of animals, like we were affecting huge, like more
than 40 kg, especially like tons of uh kilos,
like Animals, land animals were not affecting that much
the animals in the sea in the uh like
small or medium. So like all of that is
makes a very select selective extinction that is not
very well explained by climate change.
Mhm. OK, so, uh, if it was due to
human activity that the megafauna extinction occurred, was it
mostly because of hunting or also other sorts of
human activity?
I believe that is all that is hunting, is
uh being a new competitor, so eating their fruits,
eating their small animals shoes, so a change in
the environment and Uh, deforesting like all of that,
you know, like I think it's not just the
hunting, I think it's just like being a new
pressure, uh, in the ecosystem in general.
Mhm. Great. So, uh, let me just ask you
one last question then. Would you like to tell
us more before we go about what you're working
on at the moment? And I mean, regarding the
topics that we talked about today, what are perhaps
some of the questions that we haven't answered yet
that you would be more excited about?
There's so many questions. There's still, I think that
is really interesting how we have open questions, uh,
in general. I think that my main questions right
now, what I'm more interested in, in searching and
keep working on is This, uh, understanding this interaction,
understanding all of the questions that you made to
me, and I was like, we don't know yet.
So how they were interacting with these animals, uh,
how long we were interacting, like you say, like
we got here and we start to hunting them
already, and we start to interact them with them
already. When we got here, uh, how and why
these animals were extinct, like this megafauna were extinct.
And I'm definitely, definitely interested in the Americas, so
I want to keep working with the Americas, uh,
especially South America, but like, The whole America, so
I want to understand uh how was the environment
where these animals lived, how that changed, and, but
yeah, especially like the interaction and finding the evidence
for these interactions in South America, especially in South
America because we don't have a lot of people
working with that here. So we have lots of
bonds. So I'm saying like just in Brazil, we
have lots of bonds, the whole South America, but
just in Brazil, we have like so much potential.
We find like so, so many megafauna bonds and
caves and rock shelters in what we call tanks,
that is like a specific uh geological setting here
uh in Brazil. So we have so much, but
researchers were paying attention only on taxonomy, so trying
to understand the species. OK, this is, this species,
no let's uh review that and come to the
conclusion that it's a new species. So just like
taxonomy in general, pale ecology, which is great and
I love it also. So uh let's do isotopes,
let's see like the do analysis on the teeth
of these animals to understand what they were eating
and this is great and this is amazing, but
this is what they were doing. They were not
looking. To these bonds trying to find evidence for
human interactions. So where human interacting with these animals
at all. So I think that this is the
main question I have now is understand especially because
a lot of researchers, especially in North America, say,
oh we don't have enough evidence, we have insufficient
data for South America. So this is what I'm
more interested in, in resolving it is trying to
find this evidence, even if it's to say, yes,
we don't like not having evidence is also an
evidence, you know, like saying that we, we saw
the bonds, we are looking for that and we
don't find evidence for human interaction until interaction until
around 13,000 years ago, for example. IS an is
an example of uh a new result, but like
what I was doing since my PhD and I'm
still working on is this archaeological site called Santalina
that I was saying that is in central Brazil
in center of South America, where we have evidence
for humans, uh, human occupation, together with giant slots
around 27,000 years ago. So I Accept the evidence
of earlier human migrations in the Americas. So there's
a lot of Interesting questions to answer about that
archaeological site and because we know that we have
that archaeological site and humans were there, I think
that probably we have other evidence, other archaeological sites
in the area in the region, but we're not
looking for them. So I think that there's a
lot of evidence that is buried and we didn't
find that yet. So I would like to keep
working on. Answering evidence for humans being here and
interacting with these animals uh before than we would
think.
Great, that all sounds very interesting, and if people
are interested, where can they find your work on
the Internet?
Uh, I have, uh, Twitter, uh, X right now,
uh, that is Tais Ronsoni. So sometimes, um, I'm
there and I also have like my website where
I publish the works that I'm doing and uh
if I have new publications and also. If I'm
doing new interviews or like where is I'm going
to be next if I'm, what is my next
appointment if I'm in each country I am because
I'm, I still don't, I'm not fixed. I, I
still don't have like a a permanent position. So
I think like my website and Twitter are the
best way to reach out to me and even
ask questions if you want.
Great, I will be leaving links to that in
the description of the interview, and Doctor Ponsani, thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a very fun
and entertaining interview. So thank you
so much. Thank you for the opportunity.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis
Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.